 "&gt;&gt; Good afternoon."  "Welcome to the second of four"  "Psychology Department Speakers Series this year,"  "the second one of this semester."  "It is my pleasure to introduce to you Dr. Sarah Domoff."  "Dr. Domoff is a clinical psychologist"  "and a professor at Central Michigan University."  "Dr. Domoff did her undergraduate degree"  "at the University of Connecticut."  "Her PhD is from Bowling Green,"  "and she did her postdoc at the University of Michigan."  "I believe I forgot to introduce myself"  "I'm Dr. Frank Connor."  "I'm the Chair of the Psychology Department."  "I'm sort of irrelevant, other than getting this set up, but"  "so, if you would, please welcome today's speaker."  "&gt;&gt; Thank you. (applause)"  "Can you guys hear me okay? (applause)"  "Everyone hear me okay?"  "Well, thank you so much for having me."  "I'm really excited to be here."  "It's my first time on campus, and it's beautiful."  "I ate at The Heritage Restaurant and that was awesome,"  "so thank you again for having me."  "So, today, the title of my talk"  "is "Child Development in the Digital Age"  ""How, and for Whom, Does Mobile Media Use Become Problematic?""  "So, just to kind of orient you"  "to what I'll be speaking about today"  "this is a really big topic-- so the objectives I have."  "I would hope that you leave here with an understanding"  "of how screen media and mobile device use"  "may impact child social-emotional development"  "and academic achievement."  "And just to define two terms, when I say "screen media,""  "I mean media delivered through a screen,"  "so not magazines or books, but laptops, computers,"  "TV, video games."  "And then, "mobile device use" refers to smartphones"  "and tablets."  "Secondly, I'd love for you to be able to leave here"  "with the ability to think about"  "and distinguish between normative, or typical,"  "versus problematic use of screen media during childhood."  "So, as you all probably know, we live in a digital age."  "Teenagers, 13 to 18 years old,"  "average 9 hours of screen media use per day."  "This is a lot."  "And children, 8 to 12 years old,"  "use approximately 6 hours of screen media per day."  "And we're seeing that not only"  "is the amount of screen time increasing for youth,"  "we're seeing that children at younger ages"  "are getting access to mobiles devices"  "and access to more opportunities to view screen media."  "Now, in 2013, about 40% of families"  "with children years 8 and under"  "owned tablet devices."  "But more recently, we've found that by age 4,"  "nearly 75% of children owned their own mobile device."  "And I believe recent research just came out"  "stating that that number was higher for"  "thinking about families with children 8 years and younger,"  "most of them have access to a mobile device of some sort,"  "including a tablet or their own, like, a smartphone."  "So, screen time media use is growing"  "and children at younger ages are getting access"  "to their own mobile devices."  "Now, in terms of my research,"  "a lot of my work focuses on diverse children's use of media,"  "so children from lower-income backgrounds,"  "racially/ethnically diverse children,"  "and how they use media."  "And we know that low-income children"  "and racially/ethnically diverse children"  "have the highest amounts of screen time,"  "and this is especially problematic"  "given the negative correlates of screen time."  "Specifically, black youth use screen media an average"  "of 2.5 hours more than their white peers..."  "and lower-income teens spend an average"  "of 3 hours more using screen media"  "than their higher-income teens-- uh, peers."  "So we're seeing disparities"  "in how much children use screen media,"  "and if this was all pro-social and educational media,"  "you probably wouldn't have me here today."  "&gt;&gt; Excuse me, is that per day? &gt;&gt; Yes, mmm-hmm."  "Feel free to jump in with questions."  "Now, it's not just kids and teens."  "We also use our devices a lot, right?"  "Adults in the US spend over 10 hours"  "using screen media per day,"  "and children are potentially affected by this."  "We have-- over half of children report"  "that their parents check their devices too often."  "32% of children report that they feel unimportant"  "when their parents get distracted by the phone."  "One of my collaborators at U of M"  "did this really interesting study,"  "looking at how families use mobile devices"  "in fast-food restaurants in the Boston area,"  "and she found that 70% of adults"  "use mobile devices during meals."  "And later research has shown that children are more"  "engage in more disruptive behaviors"  "when their parents are on mobile devices,"  "potentially to get their attention..."  "and parents are more quick to respond"  "with anger or frustration to those children"  "when they're on or preoccupied with their phones."  "So this is really raising some questions"  "about what does this media use look like"  "and what implications does this have"  "for family interactions, for parent-child interactions,"  "for family relationships?"  "The first study I'll be presenting on"  "seeks to answer some of these questions."  "We know that children are using screen media a lot."  "Parents are."  "Children at younger ages are using mobile devices."  "But what does this look like actually"  "what does this actually look like in the households?"  "What do families-- how do families use screen media,"  "mobile media?"  "Research on this and different theories have been supported"  "looking at how parental mediation,"  "or how parents manage and talk to children"  "about their media use can be really important"  "and can buffer against the negative effects of media."  "Does this still occur in today's digital age?"  "Let me dive a little bit more into parental mediation"  "because this is really important."  "There a lot of focus on the negative effects of media,"  "but there's also this protective factor here,"  "the role that parents have"  "in reducing exposure to certain types of media"  "and explaining to children"  "what they're seeing on television."  "We know that children whose parents use parental mediation"  "have fewer negative effects of media use,"  "and that happens through different types"  "of parental mediation, which I'll briefly explain right now."  ""Social co-viewing" just means having a parent present"  "with a child, watching TV or media."  ""Restrictive mediation" means setting limits."  "Parents can set limits on what their children see"  "in terms of content and for how long they use media."  "And then, "active mediation" is the really good stuff,"  "what we want all children to experience"  "and that's having a parent present,"  "explaining the content that they're seeing,"  "labeling character behaviors as good or bad,"  "explaining the motivations behind characters,"  "and really inserting the family's values"  "into what they're seeing on TV,"  "to really put that into a context for the child."  "So, parental mediation can be really wonderful"  "and is necessary-- yeah?"  "&gt;&gt; Are these studies at all done in correlation with schools"  "and how schools use the media?"  "&gt;&gt; Not yet."  "So these are-- a lot of the research"  "&gt;&gt; These are just home? &gt;&gt; These"  "a lot of this is based on parent report of use"  "children's use at home, correct."  "We don't know much about what parental mediation"  "looks like today, in our digital environments."  "We have some ideas of how parents manage"  "internet exposure, but we still have a lot to learn."  "And so, that's where this study one comes in."  "We know that research has been focused"  "on mediation of TV use and video games."  "And again, this is primarily through self-report,"  "but we don't know what it looks like in real-time in households."  "And so, the aims of this study,"  "this first study I'll present to you,"  "include using observational methods,"  "actually witnessing how children use media in the home"  "and how parents mediate, or do not mediate, their content."  "And then, identify themes of measured"  "parent-child interactions around media use"  "that are salient in this digital age."  "So, like I said, we have research"  "on how parental mediation works for TV exposure,"  "but does it still occur to the same degree"  "for other types of media?"  "And what's it look like right now"  "in households in the United States?"  "So, in this study, it was an observational study."  "I'll get into the methods"  "of how we captured household media use in a second."  "So, it was a smaller sample."  "We had toddlers and preschoolers"  "and approximately 50% were male."  "A majority were non-Hispanic white families."  "And most mothers in the study reported"  "having a high school degree or higher."  "This is what I'm really excited to share with you today."  "Has anyone heard of the Language Environment Analysis,"  "or LENA, technology?"  "It's really, really cool."  "So, it audio records the home environment"  "to provide a deeper understanding of contextual"  "and parent-child interaction factors"  "potentially salient to media use."  "So, children in our study wore the device."  "It's right there on the bottom of your screen,"  "and little kids put it in a shirt that they"  "they're designed to hold the recording device."  "And they wore it for a couple days at home,"  "and it recorded all things in their environment."  "Now, what's really cool about LENA"  "for people that, like me,"  "that study technology and media use"  "is that it tells us when in the hour of the recording"  "an electronic media signal is present."  "So, we can isolate segments of the audio environment"  "that have media present,"  "and we can transcribe or look more deeply"  "at what's happening when TV is on,"  "what's happening when there's electronic media that's audible."  "And so, that's exactly what we did."  "&gt;&gt; Could you explain-- &gt;&gt; Yeah."  "&gt;&gt; The different bars, what the different colors mean?"  "&gt;&gt; Yeah, so the yellow indicates the presence"  "of electronic media. &gt;&gt; Okay."  "&gt;&gt; And so, that's what I was really interested in."  "There's other types of codes that they have"  "for different types of things in the environment"  "based on acoustic signaling."  "I was focused on the yellow bars,"  "finding those hours when we had media present"  "because I want to know how do, if at all, parents talk"  "to their children about what they're seeing."  "&gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; On TV or any other type of device"  "that provides audible electronic media."  "So, what we did, we got a lot of data,"  "so we focused on the first hour"  "in which a media signal was present,"  "and we transcribed parent-child communication"  "about media during that segment."  "These transcripts of parent-child verbal interactions"  "were reviewed by cross-disciplinary experts"  "so people in-- somebody from communication studies,"  "developmental behavioral pediatrician,"  "and clinical psychologist-- reviewed the transcripts"  "and identified themes of interactions around media use."  "So I wanted to present to you the four themes that emerged."  "What did we actually see in these homes?"  "So, as I mentioned, parental mediation is really important."  "And I talked to you about some different types"  "active mediation being wonderful,"  "restrictive mediation, and social co-viewing."  "What we heard and what we read in the transcripts"  "was that parental mediation was primarily restrictive."  "It was tech-focused, meaning a lot of it was focused"  "on HOW to use technology,"  "not really the content of what the child was viewing."  "So, to give you some examples."  "We have a mother saying to her toddler,"  ""No no pressing buttons now."  ""Just talk to Nana," regarding a child"  "talking on the phone with Grandmother."  ""Come on, give me the phone."  ""Play a game," on the mother's phone."  ""Push next-- I'm gonna tell you how to play.""  "So it was really focused-- the communication around media"  "was focused on instructing the child to use the device"  "and not so much about what the child was seeing on the devices."  "Does that make sense?"  "How to use the phones"  "and different ways that we charge a phone, for example."  "So mother would say, "Okay, someone needs"  ""to plug the phone in.""  ""It is plugged in!""  ""You have to jiggle it a little."  ""It vibrates, that means that it's plugged in.""  "So helping children learn about how to use mobile devices,"  "but not so much what we've studied before,"  "about talking about what they're seeing"  "on the mobile devices."  "So, in some, parental mediation was primarily restrictive,"  "so setting limits on use,"  "and focus on using-- actually using the technology,"  "versus talking about the content."  "Now, when we did hear active mediation,"  "though it was uncommon, when we did hear it,"  "it was because the child asked for it or elicited it."  "Typically, when we study parental mediation,"  "we think about the parent kind of proactively saying,"  ""Okay," sit down with the child,"  "and, "This is how-- this is what you're seeing"  ""on TV or whatnot.""  "In our research, we found that it was more often the child"  "that was asking the parent to join in with them"  "in their digital world."  "So, for example, a child said, "What happened?""  "in response to a scene in "James and the Giant Peach""  "and the mother explained what happened."  "So that's kind of part of this active mediation piece,"  "but it's a child bringing it about."  "A child saying, "I can't watch this one,""  "and the mother asking, "Is it scary?""  ""Uh-huh." "Oh.""  ""I don't like the villain.""  "So, these may seem like pretty simple statements,"  "but, really, what it's showing is that children"  "are trying to get more parental interaction"  "around their media use, what they're seeing,"  "and they're eliciting it."  "Now, it probably doesn't come as a surprise to most of you,"  "but we heard a lot of negotiation"  "between parents and children about screen time."  "So, for example, we had one interaction,"  "a mother saying-- okay, trying to set limits"  ""You get five minutes of TV."  ""It's too late already today.""  "And the child saying, "I want to watch TV for 10 minutes.""  ""No." "What about nine minutes?""  "(audience laughing) "No.""  ""Can I watch-- can I play on my iPad?""  "What do you guys think? &gt;&gt; Yes."  "&gt;&gt; "Yes, you may play on the iPad.""  "Isn't that something?"  "And the child spends time on the iPad,"  "and it's not watching pro-social"  "or educational media in this example."  "It was actually a glorified advertisement."  "So, you know, think about that"  "and how parents perceive, or may perceive,"  "mobile technology and its benefits."  "When, if you're not seeing what the child is actually viewing,"  "what they could be exposed to, right?"  "So, that was the third theme."  "When we did hear this back and forth,"  "it wasn't processing content,"  "it was, "I want to get more time,""  "or, "Can you give me this mobile device?""  "What I think is really kind of descriptive"  "of what at least a households we observed look like"  "was what we're calling "parallel family media use.""  "So, we observed children being exposed"  "to multiple types of screen media in the home,"  "with devices being used at the same time"  "by different family members across all the age groups."  "So this is-- you know, a reminder,"  "this is including children as young as 1 year of age."  "So, examples of this type of parallel family media use"  "include preschool-aged children were exposed"  "to other family members using their own devices"  "while they independently viewed media."  "So we heard siblings use separate devices"  "at the same time."  "So it's this concept of "together alone.""  "They're together, but they're not present with the same media."  "What is of great concern to clinical psychologists,"  "people that study a child's academic functioning"  "and what can get in the way of success in school,"  "is what we saw around media multitasking"  "and I'll define what that is."  "I'm gonna give you some more examples of the negative impact"  "of media multitasking in a few slides."  "We often heard TV on in the background"  "while children and their parents were using mobile devices."  "So children at young ages are media multitaskers."  "They are playing with a device and watching TV,"  "using multiple media at the same time."  "Media multitasking."  "And this is really concerning,"  "because we know that that has negative associations"  "with a variety of cognitive outcomes"  "for at least adolescents and young adults."  "This is showing that this needs to be studied"  "at younger ages, 'cause it's happening today"  "with younger children."  "So, this observational study gives us some evidence"  "that there are changing practices"  "in how families use media."  "Now, granted, this was a small study."  "We definitely hope that this encourages people"  "to do larger-scale studies, using surveys if they can,"  "to capture some of the things that we saw here"  "to see how widespread it is,"  "predictors of this type of use in the home,"  "and what that means for the child's development."  "We did hear a limited amount"  "of parent-child engagement around media use."  "When it did occur, it was because the child asked for it"  "and the child got it to happen."  "We actually also heard siblings mediating the content"  "for their younger siblings."  "And so, siblings may be playing an even greater role"  "in media management in the households, today."  "Multiple media mobile devices may challenge"  "parental mediation efforts."  "So, it's really hard to mediate content that you can't see"  "when you're-- if you're on your phone across the room"  "and your child's on the tablet."  "So it's really challenging parental efforts"  "to manage and talk about what the child is seeing."  "Thinking about what the media use was like in these homes,"  "it made me wonder if I were to call a family up"  "and ask them how many hours they used screen media that day,"  "I don't know if they'd be able to tell me accurately"  "because if most of the family members"  "are using their own media,"  "how can you report on your child's media use"  "if you're using media?"  "You know, it was just really remarkable how much media"  "and different types of media were being used"  "that it's really gonna necessitate us"  "using things like passive sensing"  "which automatically captures"  "what people are doing on their phones..."  "and can give that information to researchers"  "to capture that amount of use and what type of use."  "And in one of my future studies,"  "we will be using an app to capture this"  "on adolescents' phones,"  "so that way, we won't be as reliant on self-reports."  "Yeah, quick question? &gt;&gt; One question, though."  "&gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; When the children wore the device"  "in your study, of the interaction between parents"  "and the child during their media use,"  "does that take into account, like, the context"  "of what they're watching?"  "Like, if some was informational"  "and you don't have to interact with the kids as much"  "because it is a teaching video or something,"  "compared to watching a movie"  "where you kind of need to explain what's going."  "Do you all take that into account in your studies? &gt;&gt; Yeah."  "We did not take into account the content,"  "but I do want to emphasize"  "that even if it's pro-social or educational media,"  "we do want parents present with that child, one-to-one,"  "talking to them about what they're seeing"  "because kids retain information"  "from positive media like that or instructional media better"  "when they have an adult scaffolding the content"  "and talking to them about it."  "So, even though it's better content,"  "we still would highly encourage parents, and teachers,"  "to be present with that child, processing the content."  "That's a great question, though."  "Yeah? &gt;&gt; You might have said it already,"  "what was the length for the study,"  "as far as time of listening to it?"  "&gt;&gt; So, it was just the first hour"  "in which a media signal was present."  "&gt;&gt; Okay, and then, also what level of information"  "was given to the parents prior to this test?"  "Just, obviously, like, the bias in knowing"  "that they're being, or what level did they know the input?"  "&gt;&gt; That we were going to observe and listen"  "to whatever was in their child's environment."  "So, it's been coded for other types"  "of how children are communicated to"  "about different types of things besides media."  "Parents had the option to not submit"  "obviously, they could decline participating in this"  "and not share certain segments"  "if they don't want us to hear them, so."  "But yeah, I think you bring up some good points"  "about the observer effect."  "Like, how you make-- great point."  "So there are limitations, obviously."  "The goal with this type of research is just to try"  "to describe a new phenomenon in our society,"  "and encourage other people out there to study this,"  "to quantify it across the population."  "We definitely want, I'm really interested"  "in how often this family parallel media use is happening,"  "and what impact that has on how parents and children"  "interact with each other,"  "and their relationships, and the child's social development."  "That's definitely to come."  "I'll take any other question"  "before I move onto my conceptual framework."  "&gt;&gt; So, parents were told that they were observing"  "the media use... &gt;&gt; Correct, correct."  "&gt;&gt; Okay, so parents could monitor that."  "Obviously, if you were told that you were being monitored"  "&gt;&gt; Yep, so-- &gt;&gt; They could use less?"  "&gt;&gt; Say that one more time? &gt;&gt; Because you said"  "it was self-reporting."  "&gt;&gt; So, the parent-- so the children wore the device all day"  "in the home."  "So, they had-- the parents knew that the child was recording"  "what was in their environment. &gt;&gt; Okay."  "&gt;&gt; But it wasn't like we told them,"  ""We're gonna look for when you talk to them about this,""  "or, "We're gonna see how you talk about feeding practices.""  "We didn't tell them specifically what we would be transcribing."  "Does that answer your question?"  "&gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay, awesome."  "So, I want to just present this to you"  "to give you a kind of a dive into how I think about"  "and study children's media use."  "So, we know there's a lot more screen time today"  "than there was when we were younger,"  "that children at younger ages are gaining access"  "to mobile devices, and family dynamics around media use"  "have been changing."  "So, what does that mean for a child's development?"  "There are three different mechanisms"  "that have been studied, and that I'm interested in studying,"  "looking at how does actual media use in children"  "affect their development?"  "And there's three different mechanisms or processes."  "The first one is called "time displacement.""  "So if children are spending time watching TV,"  "they're not spending time doing something else"  "that could be good for their development."  "So, if they spend most of their time playing video games"  "that's not multiplayer-- just single-player video games"  "they're not spending time socializing with other peers."  "So, it's this idea of, we take time away from something"  "that could be beneficial to the child."  "What I've been seeing a lot more in the research,"  "and the two mechanisms that I look at"  "specific to how media use affects a child's health"  "and their well-being"  "are these bottom two mechanisms,"  "and I'll talk about those more in-depth later."  "So, one is that it's not so much"  "how much time children use media, but what they see."  "So the content."  "Content matters."  "And the second is interference with other contextual behaviors."  "So, with mobile devices,"  "viewing media through your mobile device,"  "you can take that anywhere,"  "and when you use the mobile device, when you view media,"  "can matter maybe more so than how much time you spend"  "with that media."  "And I'll tell you what I mean in just a second."  "So, in terms of content, many of you have probably heard"  "about how viewing violent content can influence"  "antisocial and aggressive behavior in children."  "We also see negative associations"  "between viewing violent content and school achievement."  "We see that viewing violent content or aggressive content"  "can negatively influence executive function,"  "especially ability to focus and sustain attention."  "So, there's a lot of research on how content matters."  "This is true for viewing sexually-explicit media."  "Viewing commercials can have a negative impact on children"  "because it makes them want and desire"  "or request those things that are advertised, like fast food."  "But I do want to point out"  "and I do focus a lot on the negative,"  "but I should point out that we see positive outcomes"  "for positive content, so content matters."  "Educational programming for preschoolers"  "can have a positive impact on cognitive development,"  "including vocabulary, literacy,"  "social behavior, academic knowledge."  "And so, programs like "Sesame Street" or "Mr. Rogers,""  "those are pro-social educational programs"  "that have been developed by people"  "that know about child development"  "and how to promote these positive things for kids."  "So, content matters in both good and bad ways."  "What a lot of my next studies will be focusing on"  "is how and when children and adolescents use media."  "The context."  "The context of media use matters."  "I want to focus on bedtime"  "because that's gonna be one of my big projects next semester"  "in our "Tech and Teen" study."  "We're going to be looking at how adolescents use mobile devices"  "after bed, and if that affects their sleep,"  "and their functioning the next day..."  "using passive sensing, so automatically tracking"  "what they do on their mobile devices."  "What we do know from prior research"  "is that having a television in the bedroom"  "is a major health risk."  "It predicts increased obesity risk,"  "beyond overall TV viewing time,"  "so, again, the context matters."  "Screen media use around bedtime may stimulate children,"  "especially if the content is fast-paced or violent,"  "which has also been found to associate"  "with greater sleep problems in preschoolers."  "And what do sleep problems look like in kids"  "when they go to school?"  "What do those kids look like,"  "kids that don't get enough sleep?"  "Hyper, hyperactive, impulsive."  "So we have-- sleep is so important for everything, right?"  "And so, media use around bedtime,"  "the context of when you view media matters"  "for a child's development."  "We know that shorter sleep duration is associated"  "with metabolic disturbances."  "And sleep deprivation has been associated"  "with increased desire for high-calorie foods,"  "along with decreased activity in the frontal cortex"  "and insular cortex regions of the brain,"  "responsible for evaluating hunger."  "So, I don't know if you all have experienced this,"  "when you don't get enough sleep,"  "the next day, you want to eat junk food"  "or you may not feel as full as you would"  "if you had enough sleep,"  "so you're seeing media use especially"  "with its impact on sleep being a big mechanism"  "linking screen time to child health and development."  "And it's not just bedtime."  "Think about any context that's important"  "for child development and child functioning."  "Think about academic-related time."  "We see a negative effect on academic outcomes"  "when youth use media or mobile devices"  "when learning or studying."  "We have a majority of college students"  "report using electronic media"  "while in class, studying, doing homework."  "That sound about right? &gt;&gt; Mmm-hmm."  "&gt;&gt; And this may begin as early as 5 to 8 years of age."  "And many children have to deal with background TV,"  "background media, while working on homework"  "which has been shown to slow them down"  "and decrease accuracy."  "And then, media multitasking,"  "which I reported to you as being common even in younger children,"  "has been found to be negatively associated"  "with older students' GPA."  "So, again, the theme of it's not how much necessarily,"  "but WHEN children are using media"  "that may have an impact on their health and development."  "I want to talk a little bit more about media multitasking."  "This is common-- about of the 8 hours youth use, that"  "of the 8 hours that youth use, using screen media per day,"  "29% of the time involves media multitasking."  "So heavy media multitaskers,"  "those to watch and use multiple media at the same time a lot,"  "show differences in their cognitive abilities."  "So, this is important for people like me"  "who do testing and assessment"  "of what may be causing problems in academic success."  "Heavy media multitaskers often have poor working memory,"  "poor interference management."  "They have difficulty on tasks requiring sustained attention,"  "and they underperform on tests of relational reasoning,"  "inhibitory control, and long-term memory."  "So, basically, it's not just how much,"  "but it's how youth use media, when they use it,"  "that can have an impact on different outcomes"  "for them, right?"  "Yeah? &gt;&gt; Just a clarification, here."  "You're looking at a-- so having media multitaskers"  "is identified as a population? &gt;&gt; Mmm-hmm."  "&gt;&gt; And then, you're using that population"  "and giving them independent assessments outside of media use"  "and comparing them to a low media use population?"  "&gt;&gt; Mmm-hmm, yep. &gt;&gt; And so, these results are"  "have nothing to do with the technology itself?"  "&gt;&gt; Mmm-hmm. &gt;&gt; It has to do"  "with that relationship between that population?"  "&gt;&gt; Exactly-- does that make sense to everyone?"  "Yeah."  "&gt;&gt; So, uh, I just had a thought in my head."  "And so, it's important to know,"  "especially if, like, kids who have cognitive issues,"  "you can kind of pinpoint what's going on"  "in their environment that can contribute to those,"  "versus someone who is, like, has a predisposition"  "to have ADD or to have those kind of cognitive (indistinct)."  "So, when you evaluate people,"  "you can like see what's going on in their environment"  "that might be a contributing factor,"  "and when you change it, it would-- &gt;&gt; It, it"  "&gt;&gt; It would change the behavior"  "and then actually that person, you know,"  "actually didn't really have ADD."  "It was just because of what was going on in the environment?"  "&gt;&gt; That's a hypothesis that needs to be tested."  "This is what the results suggest,"  "that definitely need to be tested in greater detail,"  "using intervention designs."  "Now, I should note that there are some youth"  "who are susceptible, more susceptible, to media effects."  "There's this differential susceptibility"  "to media effects model."  "Basically, in a nutshell, means that youth"  "who may be most affected may also be naturally drawn"  "to this type of use of media,"  "so youth who have ADHD symptoms may be more drawn to,"  "or use, initially more, play more video games"  "that are fast-paced,"  "but we see this kind of cycle"  "where they may be initially drawn to it,"  "but it is associated with poor functioning over time."  "So, there's definitely individual differences here"  "that need to be studied-- I do want to point that out."  "Thanks for the question."  "Yeah, I'll take one more question,"  "then we'll move onto the next objective."  "&gt;&gt; What age are you referring to?"  "&gt;&gt; Those were young adults."  "So, this has not been studied in children yet,"  "and that's definitely something that needs to happen."  "&gt;&gt; Young adult, meaning what age?"  "&gt;&gt; Like college-aged students."  "&gt;&gt; That's what this is? &gt;&gt; Yeah, mmm-hmm."  "So we have a lot more to study"  "in terms of what this looks like in children."  "For sure, great question."  "So, the second objective I had for you for this,"  "this presentation is,"  "we know that youth are using media a lot"  "and we know different ways that media may affect children,"  "but when does it become problematic?"  "When does it become a clinical concern, if you will?"  "Obviously content matters, when they use it matters,"  "but what about those youth who"  "whose parents say they think that they may be addicted"  "to using social media or using mobile devices?"  "What's normal versus not?"  "Well, in the literature,"  "there's been three types of problematic use defined."  "One is this excessive or addictive-like use,"  "use that interferes with functioning."  "Risky use."  "So, for example, use while driving, sexting..."  "use that can harm the user themselves or others."  "And then, anti-social use,"  "which cyber-victimization, cyber-bullying would fall under,"  "use that harms others, on purpose."  "I should make a point to say"  "that a lot of youth spend a good amount of time"  "using screen media,"  "and their use doesn't seem to appear"  "interfere, if you will-- with their functioning."  "So, it's not that all children show"  "these types of problematic media use."  "It's a small proportion... but it still matters."  "We see a lot in the media, this really"  "blowing up of how media use is all bad,"  "and that all kids can be addicted,"  "and that's definitely not the message"  "I want to give you today."  "I want to talk about what are the different ways"  "and behaviors that may indicate a problem with using media,"  "with the caveat that, for most youth,"  "it doesn't become a problem."  "So the examples I'm about to give you"  "are really more clinical examples, okay?"  "So, in terms of problematic media use,"  "most of this research has been studied"  "or done in adolescent populations."  "Pathological gaming, or video game addiction,"  "has been the type of problematic media use"  "that's been studied the most..."  "so much so that in our diagnostic manual, in Section 3,"  "they have an "Internet Gaming Disorder" listed."  "Now, this is not something I could diagnose right now,"  "but it's something that they want to have more research on,"  "and to see if this is an actual disorder that exists,"  "that we'd want to include in the DSM-6."  "Given what I shared with you"  "about children at younger ages using mobile media,"  "you know, a question comes up as to,"  ""Could these symptoms manifest in children, younger children,"  ""so children under age 14?""  "So, could we apply these nine symptoms,"  "these nine criteria, to kind of quantifying"  "problematic media use in younger children?"  "So, this is where my second study"  "that I'll be presenting today comes in."  "My collaborators and I developed"  "the "Problematic Media Use Measure," or "PMUM.""  "Now, this-- as I mentioned, these items were generated"  "based on the criteria of Internet Gaming Disorder"  "in DSM-5,"  "and the content used to generate these items"  "are questions drawn from the literature"  "on problematic media use."  "Clinical experiences, so working with families"  "whose children had issues with gaming"  "or other types of media"  "that were causing problems in their lives,"  "and interviews that we did with mothers, in Michigan,"  "about their experiences in managing excessive use of media."  "60 items were generated."  "We sent them to experts around the country,"  "experts from different disciplines,"  "but who studied behavioral addictions,"  "or media-related or screen media-related addictions"  "and they gave us feedback and we revised it."  "And this is before we actually carried out the study."  "To give you some background,"  "this is the measure instructions."  "Now, we wanted to keep it broad enough"  "so that it could be used as a screener,"  "that clinicians, pediatricians could use this"  "as a way to see"  "what symptoms were being endorsed by parents,"  "if they needed to talk to them about it"  "in more depth in the office."  "So, this is a parent report form,"  "and we asked them to think of any type of screen media"  "or devices that their child uses,"  "and we asked them a variety of questions"  "that tap into those nine criteria."  "So this is what the PMUM Short Form looks like."  "Nine items, one item per symptom."  "And so, the types of questions are not,"  ""How many hours does your child use media?""  "It's, "What are the behaviors around media use"  ""that may cause problems in the child's life?""  "So, my child's screen media use"  "interferes with family activities."  "It causes problems for the family,"  "the child becomes frustrated"  "when he or she cannot use screen media."  "We heard parents talk about how the child"  "won't go to sleep at night,"  "in order to keep gaming."  "Refuses to go to school"  "in order to keep playing video games or use a tablet."  "When my child has had a bad day, media is the only thing"  "that seems to make him or her feel better."  "So, really, symptoms of root problematic use"  "do you see how this is different and more clinical"  "than the typical questions we may ask"  "just about overall media time?"  "So, in terms of the method"  "and this was just recently published"  "in the "Psychology of Popular Media Culture,""  "we recruited parents, mothers,"  "for the first part of the study,"  "ages 4 through 11 years old, on Amazon Mturk."  "They completed the PMUM, the full measure,"  "and additional measures to test validity."  "So, they answered questions"  "as best as they could about child screen time,"  "about if they had concerns about the child's media use,"  "and then psychosocial functioning difficulties"  "with the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire,"  "basically capturing those subscales"  "of potential problems in the child's life,"  "so peer relationship problems, hyperactivity/impulsivity,"  "emotional symptoms, and so forth."  "We had 291 mothers who reported"  "on their youngest child in the home."  "The most commonly-used media in this sample was tablet..."  "not different from television."  "More recently, television's still"  "the most popular used media,"  "but now, it seems that tablets are reaching same level."  "69% of children in this sample owned their own mobile device,"  "again, you know, showing how common this is"  "and that younger ages children are owning their own devices."  "And on average, children received"  "their first mobile device at age 7."  "Average daily screen time was 5.47 hours in this sample."  "So, we did a variety of data reduction analyses"  "to select the items"  "that were most consistent with this concept"  "of problematic media use as an overall factor."  "We found, to test convergent validity,"  "we looked at correlations between the PMUM score"  "so how parents reported on that measure"  "about children's problematic media use-- and screen time."  "And mother-reported worry about child media use."  "To determine incremental validity,"  "we did multiple regression analyses"  "to determine whether that measure we developed accounted"  "for significant variance in these child's functioning"  "over and above screen time."  "Exploratory factor analyses indicated"  "that this was capturing a unidimensional factor structure,"  "just meaning that these symptoms capture"  "this overall construct of problematic media use."  "We selected the three highest loading items per symptom"  "to create a final scale of the 27 items for the full-scale,"  "and a nine-item version for the short form."  "We saw great internal reliability"  "and evidence for convergent validity..."  "that higher scores on the Problematic Media Use Measure"  "associated with more screen time, which makes sense."  "If parents report problematic media use,"  "more likely than not, the child has a lot of screen time."  "And mothers' own reported worry"  "about their child's media use."  "What's really important is this table, here,"  "in terms of incremental validity."  "More often than not,"  "pediatricians or even researchers like myself"  "measure or quantify children's media use"  "by how many hours they use screen media."  "For a while, it was just"  "number of hours was what was defined as the problem,"  "and there have been guidelines"  "that pediatricians had about how many hours was too much."  "And so, typically, we ask parents,"  ""How many hours does your child you screen media?""  "as a proxy for what could be a problem"  "or what could interfere with a child's functioning."  "What we found with the PMUM is that"  "it did a better job in predicting total"  "in predicting total dysfunction in a child's life,"  "than total amount of screen time."  "So, even when we controlled for screen time,"  "the PMUM score associated"  "with overall indices of child functioning,"  "indicating that this may be more valuable or predictive"  "than just asking parents"  "about how many hours their child uses screen media."  "We confirmed the factor structure of this scale"  "in an additional sample of 600 parents,"  "and confirmed the factor structure"  "in the nine-item version"  "and we found that it works equally well for boys"  "and for girls, and also supported additional analysis"  "of convergent validity."  "And so, there are a lot of strengths to this measure,"  "and that it's suitable for children aged 4 to 13."  "And up to this point, we didn't have a measure out there"  "that would capture this addictive-like"  "or problematic use of media."  "It was really specific to adolescents,"  "so it's looking like, based on this study,"  "that this measure could do a good job at that."  "Now, you know, we see here"  "that how children use media may be more predictive"  "than how long they use media,"  "but there are several limitations to this study"  "that I want to point out,"  "that I hope that having this measure"  "will encourage researchers to study this further."  "We don't know if there are certain children"  "who are at more, or at a greater risk"  "for excessive or addictive-like use of media."  "Some people have posited"  "that maybe kids with poor self-regulation"  "have more problematic media use."  "Or does more problematic media use"  "associate with poor self-regulation,"  "or do we find support for both?"  "Like, with the model I mentioned earlier,"  "the differential susceptibility to media effects model,"  "that maybe some children are just"  "with poor emotion regulation, are more likely"  "to use media excessively or mobile devices excessively,"  "and that, in turn, takes time away"  "from those opportunities to learn how to self-regulate..."  "and then, associates with poor self-regulation."  "We don't know yet."  "We also don't know if these the behaviors reflect"  "a distinct syndrome."  "When, you know, my initial impetus for studying this"  "was as a result of some of my clinical experiences."  "Could these behaviors reflect something,"  "a separate disorder, or is this just a manifestation"  "of symptoms related to screen media"  "that is part of a different disorder,"  "like ADHD or Autism Spectrum Disorder?"  "We don't know that yet,"  "but we do know that parents are really concerned about this,"  "and they want to know if their children are using media"  "in problematic ways."  "And up to this point, we weren't really sure"  "what behaviors best corresponded to problems in functioning."  "But now, we have something"  "and I really do hope that researchers take this"  "and validate it in other samples,"  "and see if it does, in a longitudinal study,"  "associate with longer-term outcomes."  "&gt;&gt; So, thinking about this as a predictor"  "or a co-morbidity or looking at"  "have you looked at the data on the known percentage"  "of disorders present in a population?"  "So, we know, roughly, how much media use is reported."  "We also know how much spectrum disorder is incident."  "Have you, then, tried to overlap these data"  "with that to see, do they overlap?"  "Or are they identifying a distinctly new population?"  "&gt;&gt; And that's what we definitely want to do."  "We-- this, again, was in two samples"  "that do not represent the population at hand."  "That would be a great research question, for certain."  "We will be testing this in our"  "for children who are getting treatment"  "at our ASD assessment clinic,"  "to see if we see differences in problematic media use"  "in children who have diagnoses of different types"  "of different clinical diagnoses,"  "but, yeah, I definitely think there's more to come."  "This was just the first tiny step."  "That's a great question."  "Any other questions about this measure?"  "Okay."  "So we are also looking at, "Do those nine symptoms"  ""also exist for not just gaming,"  ""but addictive-like use of phones in teens?""  "Again, similar symptoms, adolescent report,"  "and a future study, we're going to be looking at"  "how do these teens-- what are some predictors"  "of addictive phone use in adolescents?"  "Do we see differences in adolescents' brains"  "for those who report being addicted to phones, versus not?"  "And so, we have just completed an fMRI study looking at this,"  "and I'm happy to share those results as they emerge."  "Again, it's this question of, is this addiction"  "is this behavioral addiction something that's distinct?"  "Do the measures that we have capture this phenomenon?"  "And so, there's a lot of work to be done,"  "but I'm really excited about it."  "So, in addition to addictive-like use of media"  "we're trying to get at what makes it problematic."  "In addition to the behaviors that I listed before"  "and use that interferes with a child's functioning,"  "there's also risky and antisocial use."  "Risky use, as I mentioned before,"  "is use that can harm the youth doing the posting."  "We have sexting, for example,"  "or excessive disclosure,"  "or inappropriate sharing based on norms of peers."  "Whereas, with antisocial use, it's use that can harm others,"  "so cyber-bullying, cyber-victimization,"  "trolling or harassing others online."  "We recently developed an intervention to help teens"  "who have been hospitalized for suicide attempts..."  "use social media in healthy ways"  "and to decrease maladaptive use that may have"  "or may not have been related to some of the depressed mood"  "and suicidal ideation that they endorsed."  "Some high-risk adolescents may use social media"  "to post content that includes threats to commit suicide,"  "saying good-bye or announcing plan to commit suicide,"  "and disclosing sensitive or private content."  "So, in these examples, you know,"  "I want to know, as a clinician,"  "what teens-- what my teens are using in terms of their apps,"  "but also what they share, what they post,"  "how they make decisions about what to post..."  "because some of these examples of risky use"  "obviously, these are really high-risk examples,"  "but we also have teens sharing"  "that they post things that they regret"  "that may not reach this level of severity,"  "but that they regret later on and they feel embarrassed about."  "And so, what we're really trying to do"  "is help teens use social media in ways"  "that is healthy and protective."  "And so, we just developed an intervention to do that"  "and, if I have time at the end, I'll definitely show you"  "the components of that intervention."  "I want to briefly get into what clinicians can do,"  "because I know we have some clinicians out here"  "in the audience."  "Before I jump into that,"  "I would love to answer any questions that you have"  "about how children use screen media,"  "what that may mean for their development,"  "when it becomes problematic."  "Are there any examples that I didn't share"  "that you've seen in your lives about problematic media use,"  "use that can get in the way?"  "Yeah."  "&gt;&gt; I guess for, like-- for the children"  "that don't have parents that monitor their media use"  "or have more parental controls on what they're viewing,"  "the internet is, like, you can"  "there's a lot of information to absorb,"  "and there's some things that kids shouldn't be looking at."  "And I think, I mean, kids are exposed"  "to those kind of things,"  "and so, definitely, expect to, like,"  "affect their brain development"  "because being exposed to adult things that, you know,"  "a teenager or an adolescent maybe should not."  "&gt;&gt; Exactly, and we're seeing kids at younger ages"  "exposed to, like, online pornography, inadvertently,"  "because there aren't controls"  "put in place on their devices,"  "and I have resources for those of you who work with parents,"  "or are parents, on how to do that."  "I'll put them up at the end."  "We'll do you-- yeah? &gt;&gt; I had a question,"  "when it comes to kids, you know, using media"  "and with binging stuff,"  "with everything these days being digital and electronic,"  "do you think like keeping your kids away from media,"  "and anything like that, would that set them behind"  "since other kids will be using it a lot?"  "And when they, when everything's going"  "to computers and stuff,"  "and kind of like you teach your grandpa how to text,"  "with computers. &gt;&gt; Yeah."  "&gt;&gt; Do you think that would put those kids"  "a little bit behind the kids that are always using media"  "and digital stuff?"  "&gt;&gt; I mean, I think it depends on the age"  "and there's a lot of different thoughts I have about this."  "For one, really young children quickly learn."  "They learn how to use technology very, very quickly."  "I'm not so concerned about them"  "not being able to know how to use a laptop"  "when they're in kindergarten,"  "if they haven't been exposed to it right out of the womb."  "I'm not concerned about that."  "For teens, though, most of their social interactions"  "and their social world is online."  "And so, I would hesitate to say,"  ""No media for kids,""  "because that could take away an opportunity"  "for them to interact with others,"  "because a lot of kids use it in healthy ways."  "I think it should be seen as more like..."  "like how we teach kids"  "on how to eat healthy foods, in moderation."  "It should be seen as something that's part of our lives"  "that we can't necessarily get away from,"  "but children can learn how to use it in adaptive ways,"  "in moderation,"  "but we also have to get buy-in from parents"  "because it's also tough for us"  "to put away our mobile devices and to not always be on it."  "So I think there's a lot more that can be done"  "by the adults in this world"  "to shape children's use of media in ways that are healthy."  "It's a great question-- yeah?"  "&gt;&gt; Mine is similar to that,"  "but has your research or anyone else's research"  "showed what would be kind of, sort of,"  "the appropriate age for a child to have a phone?"  "Like, I see some 6-year-olds"  "and I think that's ridiculous,"  "but is there kind of an appropriate age?"  "&gt;&gt; Well, they-- the American Academy of Pediatrics"  "has some guidelines on this."  "For children, you know, zero to 1.5, 2,"  "having access to mobile technology"  "if it facilitates social interactions"  "with a loved one is okay."  "So, if a child wants to Skype with Grandma,"  "that's one thing,"  "and just in terms of exposure to any screens."  "There's a move away from giving exact age limits"  "or age recommendations"  "because it's not so much the device,"  "it's what they see, how they use it,"  "versus it just being present."  "So it depends on a lot"  "and it's kind of growing to be something that we,"  "as clinicians and educators, need to be able to talk"  "to parents about over time, and as a child grows,"  "to determine what would be best for that child."  "And there's some children,"  "like we found with that measure I developed,"  "that may just have a propensity"  "to be really, really engaged to a problematic level"  "with certain types of media."  "You know, I really want to know what happens"  "to those kids in school when there's screens all around"  "and what that means for their functioning."  "And so, it also could depend"  "on a child's individual characteristics."  "There's some children that just..."  "just not really that interested in mobile devices."  "They want to play outside."  "And so, the answer is, it depends"  "and it takes a lot of thinking to determine"  "what would be appropriate for your own child."  "Yeah? &gt;&gt; I had a question."  "You talked about three items,"  "on media use and time displacement."  "You know, are there guidelines or benchmarks"  "for what an item is that could be beneficial,"  "like to compare it to?"  "&gt;&gt; Can you explain that one more time?"  "&gt;&gt; Like, as far as time displacement."  "&gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, time spent not doing something else,"  "is there like a guideline for what is considered beneficial"  "and how much time we should have doing that,"  "where you should be beyond the both?"  "&gt;&gt; It is-- again, the policy is"  "to move away from giving exact time limits."  "It should be a balance and moderation"  "throughout the child's day."  "That child should be engaged in a variety of activities"  "that promote their development,"  "so a portion of that may be some screen time."  "But it's important that they have opportunities to play,"  "and to get exercise,"  "and to interact with people in their environment."  "What the American Academy of Pediatrics has, right now,"  "I can show you real quick,"  "is a family media use plan."  "And that's a great way to start figuring out"  "what would be best for your own family."  "So, if you guys want to take a picture this with your phone."  "(chuckling)"  "The first website, right there,"  "is-- and I don't know if I can get internet access,"  "but basically what it does is,"  "has you create goals for your family."  "It could be-- and it may not be specific to time."  "It may be, "Let's not have devices at dinner time"  ""for three of the nights this week.""  "And it has you select the different age range,"  "age ranges of your children."  "And so, you can set up different plans for your family"  "or for families that you work with."  "It's great."  "Again, they did this because it's"  "we can't give, like, black and white answers anymore"  "about what's, like, the amount of time"  "that beyond which is problematic."  "I mean, it's too simplistic"  "because, for some kids, it could be less amount of time."  "For other kids, it could be more amount of time."  "It's more about how they use it and what they see."  "The content is what really matters."  "&gt;&gt; For those that are trying to take a picture here,"  "this entire presentation will be online early next week,"  "through the Psychology Department website,"  "so you'll be able to scroll forward,"  "and you, too, can get to this thing, so."  "&gt;&gt; Awesome, I'll also put this up on my website as well."  "&gt;&gt; There are some questions. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah, hi."  "&gt;&gt; I just want to go back to your comment"  "about risky behavior in adolescents."  "I'm a former health teacher in high school,"  "and one of the areas that I was aware of near the end"  "of my teaching career is using social media,"  "especially the internet,"  "to get information about how to design substances for use."  "So how to-- god-- intensify their usage"  "of different types of drugs. &gt;&gt; Yeah."  "So that, there are some projects"  "that are being funded by the NIH, right now,"  "to look at-- and I didn't speak about that in terms of content,"  "but content related to seeing risky behaviors,"  "whether it's consuming alcohol, using drugs,"  "promoting or normalizing alcohol or drug use"  "or other substances."  "It's really powerful, through social media,"  "and so what the researchers who are experts, in that domain,"  "are looking at, how does viewing these types of content"  "and social media affect youth?"  "We do see some evidence that it does associate"  "with earlier initiation and use,"  "but that's also-- when I say "content,""  "it could be any type of content"  "you wouldn't want your adolescent to see"  "that can influence their behaviors"  "in those different health domains."  "Yeah? &gt;&gt; I have a question on"  "if parents actually are engaged in asking questions"  "versus their child asking questions."  "Does that-- like, what kind of difference"  "does it actually make?"  "Is it just a like a continuum, because I imagine no screen time"  "is still probably idyllic, right,"  "and then maybe the parent being engaged,"  "versus not so much? &gt;&gt; Yeah."  "&gt;&gt; So we-- &gt;&gt; Or, kids by themselves?"  "&gt;&gt; We actually don't know a whole lot about differences"  "when children elicit-- like elicit the active mediation,"  "versus parents eliciting it."  "This is something, to our knowledge,"  "hasn't been studied."  "And that's why it was one of our themes in our research."  "It was like, "Wow, this is really interesting."  ""Children are asking for this"  ""or trying to get it from their parents,""  "so we don't know about those differences."  "It could be that children who are more verbal"  "or have better communication with their parents"  "may be doing this, and so they may already have"  "some protective factors related to media use,"  "so it'd be really interesting to see"  "what child factors may be at play in children"  "who are getting more of that active mediation."  "You know, from a clinician standpoint,"  "I want to know what the child's favorite shows are,"  "their favorite websites, their favorite apps."  "If the parents don't know that,"  "then that's a moment of intervention"  "where I can do some psychoeducation on that,"  "and talk to them about some of this research."  "With teens, I love asking them about what types of apps"  "they like to use, what's their favorite social media,"  "you know, who do they follow on social media?"  "A lot of them follow celebrities,"  "so that can kind of give me some insight"  "into what their interests are."  "So there's a lot of questions that we could be asking"  "in the clinical arena to help understand"  "where these adolescents are at"  "and what they may be seeing that could be risky for them."  "&gt;&gt; I guess I was thinking more like the younger kids,"  "with cognitive development, right,"  "it could make a big difference"  "to our trying to engage them more socially,"  "and ask them, like-- think about,"  ""Oh, what happened to that character?""  "&gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Or, "What would you do?""  "&gt;&gt; We know that kids who have active mediation,"  "even if the content is pro-social or educational,"  "have better effects of seeing that type of content,"  "so it's a good thing."  "We definitely want parents to be more engaged"  "and talking about pro-social and educational content as well"  "'cause we do see positive outcomes for those kids."  "&gt;&gt; It's still better to read a book, right,"  "and talk about that, versus..."  "&gt;&gt; Umm..."  "there's some-- I definitely think"  "kids should be read to every day,"  "but there are some great programs"  "that do teach children some things."  "I mean, if that's a possibility,"  "if you can read a book, great,"  "but I think for a lot of families, it's"  "children have to be with their screens."  "And so, we have to do harm reduction approaches"  "in today's age, so."  "&gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Yeah."  "What other question?"  "Oh, yeah, I'm sorry-- I didn't see you back there."  "&gt;&gt; In relation to screen time and children with ADHD,"  "is it harmful to not have that outlet for them,"  "for like-- I'm not saying video games or I'm not saying"  "I'm saying just to give them something to do"  "with their energy and all their"  "I mean, I understand how the gaming could be harmful,"  "but is it possible to take away that outlet for it?"  "&gt;&gt; I-- &gt;&gt; Do you understand what I'm saying?"  "&gt;&gt; Yeah, I would work with the parents"  "around other outlets for the child that they enjoy as well,"  "that would involve peers and things that are"  "aspects of where they're at in their development"  "that I want them to be on target with."  "&gt;&gt; One more, so let's say it's"  "maybe someone in the audience sees this information,"  "and says, "Okay, my kid is on media too much.""  "If they have been doing it for a while,"  "could it be harmful, kind of like an addiction,"  "to just go home and say, "Okay, from now on""  "could that lead to bad behavior"  "or is it something you might want to slowly wean down?"  "&gt;&gt; So, like in terms of too much use,"  "what I-- and so, that's actually one of the symptoms"  "that was on that measure, remember,"  "was about how it was really hard"  "to get their child away from screen media use."  "So parents that may have tried this"  "and it just did not go well."  "So, as a clinician, what I would do is come up"  "with some sort of a treatment plan"  "that would reduce the amount of screen time"  "and increase other types of enjoyable activities,"  "or set limits on the child can get the screen time"  "when these things are completed."  "It's really tough,"  "especially with adolescents and social media."  "When things go wrong on social media for adolescents,"  "they're really-- they really don't want to share that"  "with adults 'cause they don't want to lose access"  "to social media because that is their social world."  "So that's, I think, even more challenging,"  "is to figure out how can we manage"  "the social media of adolescents"  "who may have done harmful things on social media,"  "but yet, still allow them to have some sort of social outlet."  "And it's really tricky"  "and I think clinicians are going to be more tasked"  "with working with families on these issues."  "And we need training in this because this is not something"  "that we're trained on in our doctoral programs."  "Any other questions about the studies?"  "I really just wanted to show you some studies"  "that kind of showcased where my research is going."  "Observational methods, passive sensing,"  "is gonna be so critical for studying media use,"  "over the next decade,"  "because, as you saw, in those households,"  "it's really hard to quantify what children are seeing."  "So, I'm excited to do that"  "and see how adolescents use their mobile devices,"  "what apps they're using,"  "what types of apps may be more problematic"  "for sleep and bedtime,"  "and if that, in turn, has an impact on their health"  "and their academic functioning, over time."  "So, we'll be starting up that longitudinal study"  "next semester."  "And then, seeing more"  "learning more about that problematic media use,"  "trying to understand what problematic media use looks"  "in clients coming through my door"  "or children of different-- with different diagnoses."  "Yeah, I can definitely talk more"  "about what I recommend to clinicians if"  "because I know we have some clinicians in the audience,"  "or if you guys have more questions,"  "I'm happy to answer more."  "Yeah. &gt;&gt; As a clinician,"  "based on some of the research,"  "our recommendation that we usually give"  "is no more than two hours of screen time,"  "not including homework."  "Is that kind of where most clinicians are selling that"  "or do you see a spectrum of"  "and, again, I know it's not an exact time,"  "an exact number. &gt;&gt; Yeah."  "&gt;&gt; It's just like you said, it's a "how,""  "but to start to set some boundaries"  "on their kids-- is that kind of a reasonable?"  "&gt;&gt; I wouldn't even talk about hours."  "I think-- at least with the mothers that we interviewed,"  "they hear that and they're like,"  ""Eh, it doesn't matter how much time"  ""because my child's watching positive content.""  "I don't know if families"  "at least the families that I may come in contact with,"  "have like the schedule all planned out"  "for when the child can view screen time."  "A lot of it's dependent on different factors"  "in their lives,"  "so I would rather you talk to them about the content,"  "and the internet controls they have in place,"  "when the child uses screens."  ""Do they watch TV during mealtime?"  ""Do they have TV in the bedroom?""  "Those are the questions that I think are most important."  "I don't know if asking parents"  "telling parents two hours a day is meaningful"  "to some families anymore,"  "because I don't know if they could even tell you"  "how many hours a day their child uses media."  "Yeah. &gt;&gt; It seems to me"  "that it's not gonna make a, well, much difference"  "for a parent to try and monitor the total amount of screen time"  "if the parent is equally addicted, because they"  "&gt;&gt; That's another point."  "&gt;&gt; The apple doesn't fall far from the tree,"  "and if the child doesn't have those boundaries on them,"  "it's because parents haven't imposed them"  "and the parents are also as much engaged."  "&gt;&gt; Exactly-- and so-- and that's the other thing,"  "especially with the observational study"  "that I told you all about."  "A lot of parents are spending many hours using media"  "or their mobile devices themselves,"  "so it's becoming an issue of reporting and monitoring,"  "and I think we're gonna rely more on technology itself"  "to help us manage technology."  "And there are some initiatives out there"  "from social media giants to act more quickly"  "when bad things are being broadcasted live."  "Still a long way to go, but I do think"  "that we'll have to partner more with technologists"  "to create interventions that parents can use automatically"  "to reduce some of the negative effects."  "&gt;&gt; Well, thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you!"  "&gt;&gt; Dr. Domoff will be here for a little while,"  "so if you want to speak with her"  "in the next 10, 15 minutes, feel free."  "Thank you all for coming."  "Let's give her a hand for sharing her research."  "(applause)"  "As I stand up here with a media device,"  "mostly 'cause I just don't have that good a memory anymore,"  "suggesting that I ever did. (audience laughing)"  "But for those of you from the community,"  "those of you who are going to be around next semester,"  "just to let you know what we're gonna have coming up"  "in the Speaker Series, then."  "Dr. Jeff Nevid is going to be here."  "Those of you who might be in General Psych, right now,"  "if you take a look at your textbook,"  "you'll see the same name, so it is actually the author"  "of the General Psych textbook we're using right now."  "And Dr. Nevid does research"  "around unconscious decision-making."  "And so, his presentation is"  ""Unmasking the Automatic Mind-- Toward a New Understanding"  ""of Unconscious Cognition,""  "so when you make decisions and you don't even know"  "what cognitions are influencing your decision."  "And then, the second one, actually, is complementary"  "to the one that we just saw."  "It's Dr. Brian Gibson."  "And Dr. Gibson is going to be talking about,"  "more, the cognitive effects of media."  "His presentation is "Media Effects-- Can Watching TV"  ""or Playing Video Games Really Change How You Think"  ""and What You Do?""  "So, Dr. Nevid's presentation is on Wednesday, February 14th,"  "and Dr. Gibson is on Thursday, March 22nd."  "They're always from 1:00 to 2:30."  "So, thank you for coming,"  "and, again, if you wish to ask questions,"  "feel free to come up and talk to Dr. Domoff."  "Thank you." 